Rule UID documentation (#19)
asam-ev/qc-framework: doc/manual/rule_uid_schema.md

<!---
This Source Code Form is subject to the terms of the Mozilla
Public License, v. 2.0. If a copy of the MPL was not distributed
with this file, You can obtain one at https://mozilla.org/MPL/2.0/.
-->

# Rule UID Schema

## Introduction

The document describes the composition of the unique identifier (UID) to be associated with quality checker rules.

The document describes composition of rule UIDs, declares some of the concepts to be used for ASAM rules, and provides an example for an UID for rule of the ASAM OpenDRIVE standard.

## Rule UID Concepts

The UID is a string which encapsulate a sequence of **concepts** that allow to identify immediately a rule across the different domain. The concept are ordered and separated via the separation character **`:`**.

The concepts for the rule UID are:

 * **Emanating Entity**: a domain name for the entity (organization or company) that declares the rule UID

>  * **Reference Standard**: a short string that represents the standard or the domain to which the rule is applied

Reviewer: ```suggestion
 * **Referenced Standard**: a short string that represents the standard or the domain to which the rule is applied
```

>  * **Definition Settings**: the semantic version of the standard or the domain to which the rule appears or is applied **for the first time**

Reviewer: ```suggestion
 * **Definition Settings**: the version of the standard or the domain to which the rule appears or is applied **for the first time**
```

Is it always `semantic` version? IMHO, some standards (especially company internal ones) do not use semantic version. So I would simply remove the word.

>  * **Rule Full Name**: the full name of the rule, as comma separated, snake lower case string. The full name of a rule is composed by the **rule set**, a categorization for the rule, and the rule **name**, a unique string inside the categorization. The rule set can be nested (meaning that can be defined as an arbitrary sequence of comma separated names, while the name is the snake case string after the last comma of the full name)

Author: > comma separated names = point separated names ?

whops. I'll fix it

> And I think we should spend a sentence, that this separation is optional, if you have many rules. No need always to provide all levels in this name.

Agree. It is more or less described in the last section. They are marked optional also in regex. Only `:` separation char is required, just for simplification for eventual parsing or visualization purposes.

 * Optional **Version**: a counter value representing the current version of the rule content. If content of the rule changes without changing the underlying logic for validation, this counter increases. If the change in the rule forces a modification in the validation logic, the change shall be treated as a new rule.

To provide a visual description for a rule UID:

```
# Without version
<emanating-entity>:<reference-standard>:x.y.z:rule_set.for_rules.rule_name
# With Version
<emanating-entity>:<reference-standard>:x.y.z:rule_set.for_rules.rule_name:2
```

> Third party rule UID creators (i.e., emanating entities different than ASAM) should still fill all the concepts above. If that is not possible, concepts shall be left blank, but separation `:` is still required (i.e., `example.com:::rulename`is valid) 

UID are designed to be queried, e.g., implementations may use UNIX pattern matching.

### Full Pattern

```
^
 (?P<ENTITY>(\w+(\.\w+)+)):
 (?P<STANDARD>([a-z]+))?:
 (?P<STD_VERSION>([0-9]+(\.[0-9]+)+))?:
 (?P<RULESET>(([a-z][\w_]*)\.)*)(?P<NAME>[a-z][\w_]*)
 (:(?P<RULE_VERSION>(\d+)))?
$
```

### ASAM Concepts

>  * Emanating Entity: `asam.net`

Reviewer: `asam.net` or just `asam`? The correct name of the org is ASAM e.V., but I don't think we need the "e.V.", neither the domain. Just my personal opinion.

Author: I like domains because you can `whois` them, and are registered entities. It should also avoid duplicates in general.

But this is not a strong opinion and I'm open to changes.

Reviewer: Ah, understand.... `whois` is an argument for using the domain. So, ok for me.

 * Reference Standards:

>    * Framework: `asam.net:qc`

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   * ASAM Quality Checker Framework: `asam.net:qc`
```

Do we have the use case for a rule, which comes from the QC Framework? If not, just remove?

Author: I'm thinking at checks like _file exists_ and similar.

   * OpenDRIVE: `asam.net:xodr`
     * v1.4.0: `asam.net:xodr:1.4.0`
     * v1.5.0: `asam.net:xodr:1.5.0` 
     * v1.6.0: `asam.net:xodr:1.6.0`
     * v1.6.1: `asam.net:xodr:1.6.1`
     * v1.7.0: `asam.net:xodr:1.7.0`
     * v1.8.0: `asam.net:xodr:1.8.0`
   * OpenSCENARIO XML: `asam.net:xosc`
     * v1.0.0: `asam.net:xosc:1.0.0` 
     * v1.1.0: `asam.net:xosc:1.1.0`
     * v1.1.1: `asam.net:xosc:1.1.1`
     * v1.2.0: `asam.net:xosc:1.2.0` 
   * OpenSCENARIO DSL: `asam.net:osc`
     * v2.0.0: `asam.net:osc:2.0.0`

> Rule full names are defined in domain-specific Quality Checker subgroups. Third party emanating entities should use  reference standard and reference version concepts defined by ASAM. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Rule full names are defined in domain-specific Quality Checker subgroups. Third party emanating entities should use reference standard and reference version concepts defined by ASAM. 
```

```
asam.net:xodr:1.6.0:road.planview.geometry.ref_line_exists
-------- ---- ----- ---------------------- ---------------
 |        |    |     |                      |           
 entitity | version  |                    name        
       standard    rule-set
```

Regarding the validation for the schema, **only the the emanating concept and the name are required**. Third party entities are not required to declare reference standard, definition settings, rule-set and version. Still, separation characters cannot be omitted. ASAM rules shall always define all concepts; rule version is still optional.

> Example: if `example.com` entity defines it's own rules, it may be something like: `example.com:::custom_rule` or `example.com:qc::custom_rule:2` and the UID should be considered valid. **However, entity should use ASAM standard and definition setting concepts in its custom rules.**

## Query rules UID

The proposed formalism allow to perform query on rules (or set of rules) using UNIX style wildcards notation (i.e., python `fnmatch` module). A query engine implementation shall return the most recent rule version available, when not stated explicitly in query string.

Examples: 

>  * query all the OpenDRIVE geometrical rules that are not in version `>= 2` of the standard: `asam.net:xodr:1.?.0:*geometry.*` matches `asam.net:xodr:1.6.0:road.planview.geometry.ref_line_exists:1`

Reviewer: ```suggestion
 * query all the OpenDRIVE geometrical rules that are not revised (version `< 2`): `asam.net:xodr:1.?.0:*geometry.*` matches `asam.net:xodr:1.6.0:road.planview.geometry.ref_line_exists:1`
```

Uh!

This whole story of the rule version is really dangerous, or difficult to understand. It looks like you stepped in our own trap. I understand that the standardization project needs this to make clear that only the prosa text was changed, not the meaning of the rule. From the QC point-of-view IMHO we just need to query or to work with the rules, not their version. I don't see a use case where we need to know the version of the rule. If you agree, then I would suggest to write that the optional version number is just for the documentation of the rules, but has no meaning for the framework.

Author: The example refers to the version **of the standard**, not the version of the rule (fnmatch for `1.?.0` matches `1.6.0` but not `2.0.0`). If the exampl is not clear I can rewrite it or eliminate it.

Author: I agree to enforce a version of the rule (not the standard) only for documentation purposes, and I agree that has no meaning from the framework.

Author: Example removed. I kept only the second example, which is clearer and on existing standards

To provide a visual description for a rule UID:

```
<emanating-entity>:<standard>:x.y.z:rule_set.for_rules.rule_name
```

> Third party rule UID creators (i.e., emanating entities different than ASAM)
> should still fill all the concepts above. If that is not possible, concepts
> shall be left blank, but separation `:` is still required (i.e.,
> `example.com:::rulename`is valid) 

UID are designed to be queried, e.g., implementations may use UNIX pattern
matching.

### Full Pattern

```
^
 (?P<ENTITY>(\w+(\.\w+)+)):
 (?P<STANDARD>([a-z]+))?:
 (?P<STD_VERSION>([0-9]+(\.[0-9]+)+))?:
 (?P<RULESET>(([a-z][\w_]*)\.)*)(?P<NAME>[a-z][\w_]*)
$
```

### ASAM Concepts

 * Emanating Entity: `asam.net`
 * Standards:
   * Quality Checker Framework: `asam.net:qc`
   * OpenDRIVE: `asam.net:xodr`
     * v1.4.0: `asam.net:xodr:1.4.0`
     * v1.5.0: `asam.net:xodr:1.5.0` 
     * v1.6.0: `asam.net:xodr:1.6.0`
     * v1.6.1: `asam.net:xodr:1.6.1`
     * v1.7.0: `asam.net:xodr:1.7.0`
     * v1.8.0: `asam.net:xodr:1.8.0`
   * OpenSCENARIO XML: `asam.net:xosc`
     * v1.0.0: `asam.net:xosc:1.0.0` 
     * v1.1.0: `asam.net:xosc:1.1.0`
     * v1.1.1: `asam.net:xosc:1.1.1`

>      * v1.2.0: `asam.net:xosc:1.2.0` 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
     * v1.2.0: `asam.net:xosc:1.2.0` 
     * v1.3.0: `asam.net:xosc:1.3.0` 
```

Has been officially released on March 7th.

   * OpenSCENARIO DSL: `asam.net:osc`

>      * v2.0.0: `asam.net:osc:2.0.0`

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
     * v2.0.0: `asam.net:osc:2.0.0`
     * v2.1.0: `asam.net:osc:2.1.0`
```

Has been officially released on March 7th.

Standards for OpenDRIVE. The Rules subsections were introduced for the first
time in revision 1.6 of the standard. **Please notice that the full name of the
rule may change in the future**.

> [ASAM OpenDRIVE Standard 1.6.0, Chapter 7.2 - Road Reference
> Line](https://releases.asam.net/OpenDRIVE/1.6.0/ASAM_OpenDRIVE_BS_V1-6-0.html#_road_reference_line),
> subsection Rule, first point: 
> > **Each road shall have a reference line**

we can identify the following concepts:

 * **emanating entity**: ASAM `asam.net`
 * **standard**: OpenDRIVE `xodr`
 * **definition settings**: the rule firstly appeared in `1.6.0`, the first
   revision to introduce the subsections rules
 * **Full name**:
    * **rule-set**: Road Planar Geometry definitions `road.planview.geometry`
    * **name**: summarizes the content of the rule, e.g. `ref_line_exists`. It
      is always the last group in dot-notation strings.

The complete UID would be something like:

```
asam.net:xodr:1.6.0:road.planview.geometry.ref_line_exists
-------- ---- ----- ---------------------- ---------------
 |        |    |     |                      |             

>  entitity | version  |                    name

Reviewer 3: There is one "ti" too much in entitity.

       standard    rule-set
```

> Regarding the validation for the schema, **only the the emanating concept and

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Regarding the validation for the schema, **only the the emanating entity and
```

> Regarding the validation for the schema, **only the the emanating entity and
> the name are required**. Third party entities are not required to declare
> standard, definition settings, and rule-set. Still, separation
> characters cannot be omitted. ASAM rules shall always define all concepts.
> 
> > Example: if `example.com` entity defines it's own rules, it may be something
> > like: `example.com:::custom_rule` or `example.com:qc::custom_rule` and the
> > UID should be considered valid. **However, entity should use ASAM standard and
> > definition setting concepts in its custom rules.**

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Regarding the validation for the schema, **only the the emanating entity and
the name are required**. Third party entities are not required to declare
standard, definition settings, and rule-set. Separation characters for omitted
parts cannot be omitted.

ASAM rules shall always define all concepts. For third parties it is highly
recommended to define all concepts, if this is reasonably possible.

> Example: If `example.com` entity defines its own rules, it may be something
> like: `example.com:::custom_rule` or `example.com:qc::custom_rule` and the
> UID is considered valid. However, if the rule for example is related to ASAM
> OpenDRIVE starting from version 1.6.0 forward, then is recommended that
> the entity use a UID like `example.com:xodr:1.6.0:custom_rule`, or where rule
> sets make sense, like `example.com:xodr:1.6.0:custom_ruleset.custom_rule`.
```

Maybe reformulate like this to make clearer and fix some typos.

> 

Reviewer: Don't understand the last part `**However, entity should use ASAM standard and
> definition setting concepts in its custom rules.**`

Did you want to say again that ASAM shall always use all concepts? If yes, then in might be simply removed. And the sentence `ASAM rules shall always define all concepts.` from the chapter above can be placed below the example for third-party rules.

Author: I want to suggest that third party entities (companies or organizations) should use all the other concept if possible. For example even if `example.com` can create the uid `example.com:::custom_rule` for a custom rule on OpenDRIVE 1.7, the rule uid should be preferably `example.com:xodr:1.7.0:custom_rule`

## Query rules UID

The proposed formalism allow to perform query on rules (or set of rules) using
UNIX style wildcards notation (i.e., python `fnmatch` module).

> Example: query all the OpenDRIVE geometrical rules that are in version 1.6 and

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Example: query all the OpenDRIVE geometrical rules that were created in version 1.6 or
```

> Example: query all the OpenDRIVE geometrical rules that were created in version 1.6 or

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Example: Query all the OpenDRIVE geometrical rules that were created in version 1.6 or
```

1.7 of the standard: `asam.net:xodr:1.[67].0:*geometry.*` matches
`asam.net:xodr:1.6.0:road.planview.geometry.ref_line_exists` but does not

> match `asam.net:xodr:1.8.0:road.planview.geometry.ref_line_exists`

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
match `asam.net:xodr:1.8.0:road.planview.geometry.ref_line_exists`.
```

It BTW also does not match 1.6.1, might want to point that out or not.

<!---
This Source Code Form is subject to the terms of the Mozilla
Public License, v. 2.0. If a copy of the MPL was not distributed
with this file, You can obtain one at https://mozilla.org/MPL/2.0/.
-->

# Rule UID Schema

## Introduction

The document describes the composition of the unique identifier (UID) to be
associated with quality checker rules.

The document describes composition of rule UIDs, declares some of the concepts
to be used for ASAM rules, and provides an example for an UID for a rule of the
ASAM OpenDRIVE standard.

## Rule UID Concepts

The UID is a string which encapsulate a sequence of **concepts** that allow to
identify immediately a rule across the different domains. The concept are
ordered and separated via the separation character **`:`**.

The concepts for the rule UID are:

 * **Emanating Entity**: a domain name for the entity (organization or company)
   that declares the rule UID
 * **Standard**: a short string that represents the standard or the
   domain to which the rule is applied
 * **Definition Setting**: the version of the standard or the domain to which

>    the rule appears or is applied **for the first time**

Reviewer 4: Has it already been discussed how to proceed if a rule no longer applies to a standard from a certain version onwards? Or whether it only applies to certain versions, e.g. "1.0.0, 1.7.0" (I'm not sure if this is happening)? This information is probably not necessary in the rule definition, but could be helpful if we want to check whether a certain rule applies to a certain file.

Author: Good catch! Yes it has been discussed. It is not included in the rule uid, but it is included in the rule metadata. It is difficult, in general, at the moment of uid creation to know when a rule will not be valid anymore (uid are immutable). Thus at the moment we are only setting the first time a rule appeared.

Cfr. #5 Pain Points and Weaknesses point 2

Reviewer 4: Alright :) with the ability to specify the applicable version range, it's fine with me.

 * **Rule Full Name**: the full name of the rule, as dot separated, snake lower
   case string. The full name of a rule is composed by the **rule set**, a
   categorization for the rule, and the rule **name**, a unique string inside
   the categorization. The rule set can be nested (meaning that can be defined
   as an arbitrary sequence of dot separated names, while the name is the snake
   case string after the last dot of the full name)
 * Optional **Version**: a counter value representing the current version of the
   rule content. If content of the rule changes without changing the underlying
   logic for validation, this counter increases. If the change in the rule
   forces a modification in the validation logic, the change shall be treated as

>    a new rule.

Reviewer 4: I don't know if it's necessary, but should we define a default interpretation if no version is specified? E.g. "no version specified, will be interpreted as version 1". I currently don't know the specified handling for rule versions. Is it desired that all rules in all versions are checked when the checker is executed or only the latest ones? For the latter interpretation, a standard interpretation for no version information would be necessary.

Reviewer 4: Later I found the following passage: 

> A query engine implementation shall return the most recent rule version available

so a standard interpretation is necessary, I think.

Author: The rule version is used only to define a change in wording in the rule that does not mandate a change in the logic for checking the rule (e.g., rephrasing), or change in its metadata description. I suppose change in rule version will almost never happen.

 * In terms of _definition_ of the rule (e.g., when the uid is firstly defined), I think we should consider version 1 as default, if no other version is available (i.e., the rule version is mandatory as explicit from rule version 2)
 * In terms of _searching_ the rule, the query implementation shall always consider the latest version available, and not 1 by default.
 
Still, **I think I should explain this better in the docs**, but before doing so I just want to confirm if we agree on the distinction between _definition_ and _search_.

Reviewer 4: Yes, I agree with you on the distinction and also on being mandatory from rule version 2.

And regarding the search, I just wanted to clarify that we take the rule version "" as "1". So given the following rules:
`asam.net:xodr:1.6.0:road.planview.geometry.ref_line_exists:`
and
`asam.net:xodr:1.6.0:road.planview.geometry.ref_line_exists:2`

A search for the latest rule version would result in:
`asam.net:xodr:1.6.0:road.planview.geometry.ref_line_exists:2`

The term "default" I used was probably confusing. I meant the interpretation of version "1" for no particular value: "".

Reviewer 3: Isn't versioning the job of git?
If the UID containing a version number somehow translates to a concrete file name (e.g. xodr_1.6.0_road.planview.geometry.ref_line_exists_**1**.py vs.
xodr_1.6.0_road.planview.geometry.ref_line_exists_**2**.py), 
git would no longer be able to maintain the history of this rule.

Reviewer 4: I don't think the rule name 
`asam.net:xodr:1.6.0:road.planview.geometry.ref_line_exists:` 
would directly infer to a filename 
`xodr_1.6.0_road.planview.geometry.ref_line_exists_1.py`

From my understanding there could be a script called `ref_line_exists.py`. This declares, for exmaple, via a variable it checks the rule `asam.net:xodr:1.6.0:road.planview.geometry.ref_line_exists:` (or multiple rules `asam.net:xodr:1.6.0:road.planview.geometry.ref_line_exists:`, `asam.net:xodr:1.6.0:road.planview.geometry.ref_line_exists:2`).

In order that the checker framework can determine which module/script checks the latest version of a rule it would query for `asam.net:xodr:1.6.0:road.planview.geometry.ref_line_exists:`. This should lead to the script/module implementing: `asam.net:xodr:1.6.0:road.planview.geometry.ref_line_exists:2`.
I just wanted to clarify that if no version is specified `*:` this will be treated as `:1` during query time and as definition. You should know that if someone defines a version `:2` of a rule, the version `:` is not handled.

     * v1.1.1: `asam.net:xosc:1.1.1`
     * v1.2.0: `asam.net:xosc:1.2.0` 
   * OpenSCENARIO DSL: `asam.net:osc`
     * v2.0.0: `asam.net:osc:2.0.0`

Rule full names are defined in domain-specific Quality Checker subgroups. Third
party emanating entities should use the standard and definition setting
concepts defined by ASAM. 

## Example

Lets start with an example for a rule UID, and lets break down its concepts. The
example references a rule listed in the subsection **Rules** of one of the ASAM
Standards for OpenDRIVE. The Rules subsections were introduced for the first
time in revision 1.6 of the standard. **Please notice that the full name of the
rule may change in the future**.

> [ASAM OpenDRIVE Standard 1.6.0, Chapter 7.2 - Road Reference
> Line](https://releases.asam.net/OpenDRIVE/1.6.0/ASAM_OpenDRIVE_BS_V1-6-0.html#_road_reference_line),
> subsection Rule, first point: 
> > **Each road shall have a reference line**

we can identify the following concepts:

 * **emanating entity**: ASAM `asam.net`
 * **standard**: OpenDRIVE `xodr`
 * **definition settings**: the rule firstly appeared in `1.6.0`, the first
   revision to introduce the subsections rules
 * **Full name**:

>     * **rule-set**: Road Planar Geometry definitions `road.planview.geometry`

Reviewer 5: I would not use **planview** here, as this layer has no rules in Opendrive and is only the "group tag" for the actual geometry elements.

What about rule-set for objects/signals? 
The complete xodr path would actually be  **road.objects.object** 
Do we want the complete path or a short form?

Author: I agree that I would not use planview, and in general the example is problematic: it is based **on a rule uid  that still has not been confirmed** by the xodr subgroup.

I think a **good approach is to open an issue on this document**, that states that all the examples should be changed and to use an existing and confirmed rule uid as soon as it available.

> Do we want the complete path or a short form?

I don't have a answer... Actually in the subgroup we already voted against using the xml structure for the rule-set, which is in line with avoiding _planview_ tags. The example still contains it because of aforementioned reasons and technical debt (the first time I wrote it I used the xml schema, before subgroup voted against it).

Reviewer: One thing/one question regarding the shortened rule set path. What is exactly the schema in OpenDRIVE and/or other XML based structures? 

`road.objects.object` --> simply `object` (Remove everything what's not needed, because `object` can only be found with `road.objects` ? May be a little be nasty when talking about `outline`, because this can be in `road.objects.object.outline` or within `road.objects.object.outlines.outline`.

And some of the rules may apply to both variants. However, a shorter version would be nice ;-) 
Probably that is something, which need to be decided by the standard or the Checker Library itself?

Author: As for now I think we delegated the decision about rule-set path to standards. The apporach taken by @MircoNierenz (if I understand correctly) is to try to adhere to xml schema, but removing the "empty container" xpath elements. So `road.objects.object` may be `road.object`. But this still needs to be decided in the subgroup.

 entitity | version  |                    name        
       standard    rule-set
```

Regarding the validation for the schema, **only the the emanating concept and
the name are required**. Third party entities are not required to declare
standard, definition settings, rule-set, and version. Still, separation
characters cannot be omitted. ASAM rules shall always define all concepts; rule
version is still optional.

> Example: if `example.com` entity defines it's own rules, it may be something
> like: `example.com:::custom_rule` or `example.com:qc::custom_rule:2` and the
> UID should be considered valid. **However, entity should use ASAM standard and
> definition setting concepts in its custom rules.**

## Query rules UID

The proposed formalism allow to perform query on rules (or set of rules) using
UNIX style wildcards notation (i.e., python `fnmatch` module). A query engine
implementation shall return the most recent rule version available, when not
stated explicitly in query string.

Example: query all the OpenDRIVE geometrical rules that are in version 1.6 and
1.7 of the standard: `asam.net:xodr:1.[67].0:*geometry.*` matches

> `asam.not:xodr:1.6.0:road.planview.geometry.ref_line_exists:1` but does not

Reviewer: ```suggestion
`asam.net:xodr:1.6.0:road.planview.geometry.ref_line_exists:1` but does not
```
